point barrow alaska 1897.
it was the height of the whaling season
ships full of men plied the cold arctic
waters
with hopes of fortune in their eyes it
was usually
a smooth and highly profitable business
but this time everything went terribly
wrong
that september eight vessels became
dangerously trapped far to the north
this year was an abnormally harsh winter
the extreme cold
had frozen the seas and the ice had
bound the ships like chains
as if it had come alive and grabbed on
gripping
tighter and tighter the screeches and
winds of the hulls
bending under the pressure 265 whalers
were all alone in this icy desert
their ship slowly being crushed to a
pulp the endless cold wind
howling in the background the
thermometer red minus 49 degrees
fahrenheit
no matter how many clothes the sailors
put on
the cold still got to their bones
it was clear they had to get out of this
trap
but there was nothing but ice as far as
the eye could see
the only way out was to wait for help
they knew their supplies would last
until january
only four months but help was on the way
in november the rescue ship ss bear
sailed from port townsend washington and
headed north as far as she could
but she couldn't reach the stranded
ships since the thick eye stretched for
thousands of miles
so the captain docked at cape vancouver
and sent a rescue party
the small team could reach the place on
foot and resupply the stranded ships
it was led by first lieutenant david h
jarvis
his deputy was second lieutenant
ellsworth p bertholf
they also took samuel j call an
experienced surgeon on the bear
who could check the health condition of
the trapped whalers
these three heroes weren't going to make
the 1500 mile journey by themselves
they got help from local reindeer
herders they also hired natives that
knew how to survive in this frozen
nightmare
equipped with skis sled dogs and
snowshoes
they set out on their long and arduous
journey
the expedition tried to move quickly but
at 50 degrees below zero
and with rough terrain nature tried to
slow them down the entire way
lucky for jarvis's team locals were
incredibly hospitable
the rescuers were invited into every
home along the way
for short rest and recuperation
because of the fast pace of the
expedition the sled dogs tired out fast
after 375 miles only a quarter of the
journey's distance
they were utterly worn out david jarvis
described in his diary
how they'd been going for 21 days
straight with only one day for rest
the dog's feet were worn bare from the
ice and snow
they'd need a week to recuperate but
jarvis didn't have that time
he was sorry to part with the best dogs
he'd seen in alaska
but he had to keep trudging on without
them
time was running out the whaling's fleet
food supply was dwindling
they were in a frozen desert and only a
small spark of hope could warm them
the rescue team understood this and
tried to move as fast as possible
on the way to the starving whalers
jarvis managed to collect about 450
reindeer from various herds
but it wasn't that simple these animals
were like gold to the natives
naturally they couldn't afford to just
give them up to strangers
charlie artistrelock a native alaskan
refused it first
jarvis explained he wanted to resolve
this issue peacefully
so he told charlie that this herd could
save the lives of hundreds of stranded
people
with this artistrolog not only agreed to
give up some deer
he volunteered to join the rescue party
other missionaries also decided to give
up their reindeer
and offered to help jarvis
the reindeer were extremely important to
the operation
they were a great source of food that
could also pull a sled with the other
supplies
the rescue team built a sort of deer
train that moved through the
snow-covered alaskan tundra
driving this train was no easy task
jarvis made a note in his diary that the
deer moved so quickly
if someone didn't have time to jump into
the sled or grab it
they could lose the team or worse be
dragged through the snow
on march 29 1898 after four months
and 1500 miles the expedition
finally reached point barrow jarvis was
able to deliver about 382 reindeer to
the whaling fleet
losing only 66. without wasting time
dr kaw began to examine the starving
sailors
what he saw was haunting what was once
healthy hearty men full of strength and
energy
now look like ghosts shells of their
former selves
the whalers had to conserve their
supplies to last this long
first lieutenant jarvis immediately had
them fed
but he also ordered them to do exercises
to speed up their recovery
nothing could be done about their ships
they were still trapped in the ice
and couldn't move an inch almost half
the whaling fleet was lost
but the heroic actions of the rescue
team made it possible to save the rest
in early july as the ice began to melt
the bear was finally able to reach point
barrow
after so many months david jarvis was
able to rejoin his crew at last
97 whalers expressed a desire to return
home with the bear
and boarded it but the way back south
was blocked by
ice until mid august only then could the
poor sailors leave the cold harsh waters
of alaska
there's no doubt that the rescue team
showed real heroism
in overcoming such a long and difficult
path to save the lives of other people
this feat didn't go unnoticed and first
lieutenant david jarvis and his
companions
were awarded gold medals of honor for
their heroism
not only that twenty five hundred
dollars in compensation
was also allocated to all the reindeer
herders and natives
who had helped the rescue team along the
way
but these whalers weren't the first to
be trapped in the dangerous ice of the
arctic
and they wouldn't be the last in june
1871 a fleet of 40 vessels looking for
bowhead whales
off the coast of alaska got into the
same situation
suddenly the wind changed its usual
direction and began to push the ice
toward the ships
seven vessels were able to go south and
escape
the remaining 33 got trapped in the ice
in mid-september the crew of the entire
stranded fleet decided to leave the
ships
1219 people boarded small whale boats
with three months worth of food the
whalers crossed about 70 miles of the
cold waters
they were eventually rescued by seven
chips that were able to escape the
frozen trap
to accommodate more than a thousand
people on the ships
they had to throw their equipment and
all the catch for that whaling season
overboard
this caused a loss of what today would
be 34 million dollars
nearly all the vessels that were stuck
in the ice except one
were crushed and sank a reminder
that man must still bow down to nature